.\"-
.\" Copyright (c) 2014,2015 Shawn Webb <shawn.webb@hardenedbsd.org>
.\" Copyright (c) 2016 Oliver Pinter <oliver.pinter@hardenedbsd.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd February 06, 2016
.Dt ASLR 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm aslr
.Nd Address Space Layout Randomization
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/types.h
.In sys/pax.h
.Pp
In the kernel configuration file:
.Cd "options PAX"
.Cd "options PAX_ASLR"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Ss Introduction
Security in
.Fx
is based primarily in policy-based technologies.
Existing tools such as
.Xr jail 4 ,
.Xr capsicum 4 ,
.Xr VNET 9 , and the
.Xr mac 4
framework can make
.Fx Ns -based systems quite resilient against
attacks.
FreeBSD lacks basic low-level exploit mitigation, such as Address
Space Layout Randomization (ASLR).
ASLR Randomizes the address space layout of an application, making
exploitation difficult for an attacker.
This manual page and the associated implementation aim to
provide a secure, robust, extensible, and easily-managed form of ASLR
fit for production use in
.Fx Ns .
.Ss General Overview
When compiled with the 
.Cd option PAX_ASLR
, systems will have ASLR enabled.
For systems with that kernel option enabled, if a user wants
to disable ASLR for a given application, the user must force that
application to opt-out.
HardenedBSD has a special application called secadm for opting
applications in to or out of exploit mitigation features such as ASLR.
.Pp
Another kernel option,
.Cd PAX_SYSCTLS ,
exposes additional
.Xr sysctl 8
tunables, allowing ASLR behavior control without requiring a reboot.
By default, the tunable hardening.pax.aslr.status can only be changed
at boot time via /boot/loader.conf.
Enabling the PAX_SYSCTLS kernel option allows a root user to modify
hardening.pax.aslr.status at run time.
See Appendix A for a list of all the tunables.
.Pp
ASLR tunables are per-jail and each jail inherits its parent jail's
settings.
Having per-jail tunables allows more flexibility in shared-hosting
environments.
This structure also allows a user to selectively disable ASLR for
applications that misbehave.
ASLR-disabled applications will still have policy-based security
applied to it by virtue of being jailed.
.Ss Implementation Details
A new sysinit subroutine ID, SI_SUB_PAX, initializes ASLR system
variables.
Upon system boot, tunables from /boot/loader.conf are checked for
validity.
Any invalid values generate a warning message to the console and the
tunable is set to a sensible default.
.Pp
For the sake of performance, the ASLR system relies on per-process
deltas rather than calling
.Xr arc4random 3
for each mapping.
When a process calls
.Xr execve 2
.Ns , the ASLR deltas are initialized.
Deltas are randomly generated for the execution base,
.Xr mmap 2
.Ns , and stack addresses.
Only the execution base of applications compiled as Position
Independent Executables (PIEs) is randomized.
The execution base of non-PIE applications is not modified.
The mappings of shared objects are randomized for both PIE and non-PIE
applications.
.Pp
The deltas are used as a hint to the Virtual Memory (VM) system.
The VM system may modify the hint to make a better fit for superpages
and other alignment constraints.
.Pp
The delta applied to the PIE execbase is different than the delta
applied to the base address of shared objects.
In the Executable and Linkable File (ELF) image handler, the
execution base of PIE applications is randomized by adding the delta
controlled by the hardening.pax.aslr.exec_len tunable to et_dyn_addr,
which is initialized to be ET_DYN_LOAD_ADDR (an architecture-
dependent macro).
The base address of shared objects loaded by the dynamic linker are
randomized by applying the delta controlled by the
hardening.pax.aslr.mmap_len tunable in
.Fn sys_mmap
.Ns .
Stack randomization is implemented using a small stack gap
and a bigger random, which applies to the stack's mapping.
On executable image activation, the stack delta is computed and
subtracted from the top of the stack.
.Ss APPENDIX A
NOTE: All tunables can only be changed during boot-time via
.Fa /boot/loader.conf
unless the kernel has been compiled with
.Cd PAX_SYSCTLS
.Ns .
.Bl -bullet
.It
hardening.pax.aslr.status
.Bl -dash -compact
.It
Type: integer
.It
Description: Toggle system-wide ASLR protection.
.It
Values:
.br
0 - ASLR disabled system-wide. Individual applications may
.Em NOT
opt in.
.br
1 - ASLR disabled but applications may opt in.
.br
2 - ASLR enabled and applications may opt out.
.br
3 - ASLR enabled for all applications. Applications may not opt out.
.It
Default: 2
.El
.It
hardening.pax.aslr.exec_len
.Bl -dash -compact
.It
Type: integer
.It
Description: Set the number of bits to be randomized for the PIE
execbase.
.It
Values:
.br
For 32-bit systems, minimum of 8, maximum of 21. For 64-bit systems,
minimum of 16, maximum of 42.
.It
Default: For 32-bit systems: 14. For 64-bit systems: 30.
.El
.It
hardening.pax.aslr.mmap_len
.Bl -dash -compact
.It
Type: integer
.It
Description: Set the number of bits to be randomized for
.Xr mmap 2
calls.
.It
Values:
.br
For 32-bit systems, minimum of 8, maximum of 21. For 64-bit systems,
minimum of 16, maximum of 42.
.It
Default: For 32-bit systems: 14. For 64-bit systems: 30.
.El
.It
hardening.pax.aslr.stack_len
.Bl -dash -compact
.It
Type: integer
.It
Description: Set the number of bits to be randomized for the stack.
.It
Values:
.br
For 32-bit systems, minimum of 8, maximum of 21. For 64-bit systems,
minimum of 16, maximum of 42.
.It
Default: For 32-bit systems: 14. For 64-bit systems: 42.
.El
.It
hardening.pax.aslr.vdso_len
.Bl -dash -compact
.It
Type: integer
.It
Description: Set the number of bits to be randomized for the shared page (vdso).
.It
Values:
.br
For 32-bit systems, minimum of 8, maximum of 21. For 64-bit systems,
minimum of 16, maximum of 38.
.It
Default: For 32-bit systems: 10. For 64-bit systems: 28.
.El
.It
hardening.pax.aslr.map32bit_len
.Bl -dash -compact
.It
Type: integer
.It
Description: Set the number of bits to be randomized
for the mmap(2) calls when MAP_32BIT flag set.
.It
Values:
.br
For 32-bit systems N/A. For 64-bit systems, minimum of 8, maximum of 27.
.It
Default: For 32-bit systems: N/A. For 64-bit systems: 18.
.El
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr mmap 2 ,
.Xr elf 3 ,
.Xr mac 4
.Rs
.%T "PaX ASLR"
.%U http://pax.grsecurity.net/docs/aslr.txt
.Re
.Rs
.%T "HardenedBSD"
.%U http://hardenedbsd.org/
.Re
.Rs
.%T "secadm"
.%U https://github.com/HardenedBSD/secadm
.Re
.Sh HISTORY
On 14 May 2013, Oliver Pinter published to GitHub an initial patch to
implement ASLR.
His work was inspired by Elad Efrat's work in NetBSD.
The patch was submitted to FreeBSD as a bug report on 24 Aug 2013.
Independenty of Oliver's work, Shawn Webb posted to his tech blog that
he was interested in implementing ASLR for FreeBSD.
Oliver found his post and suggested that he and Shawn work together.
On June 08, 2014, preparatory work was committed to HardenedBSD, adding
Position-Independent Executable (PIE) support in base.
PIE support was removed sometime later.
On 07 Apr 2014, SoldierX agreed to sponsor the project and donated a
sparc64 machine and a BeagleBone Black to Shawn Webb.
This hardware was used for testing and debugging ASLR.
ASLR for FreeBSD was first introduced in HardenedBSD.
On 19 December 2015, HardenedBSD officially decided to halt the
upstreaming process.
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An -nosplit
.An Shawn Webb .
The ASLR implementation was written by
.An Oliver Pinter and
.An Shawn Webb .
.Sh BUGS
The original PaX implementation, from which the HardenedBSD
implementation also drew inspiration, uses a special ELF process
header which requires modification of executable files.
The authors of the HardenedBSD implementation have deliberately chosen
to go a different route based on the
.Xr mac 4
framework.
Support for filesystem extended attributes will be added at a later
time.
